=head1 NAME

fb_lock_print - Information about Firebird database locks

=head1 SYNOPSIS

=over

=item B<fb_lock_print> -d I<database> [I<option>...]

=item B<fb_lock_print> -f I<lockfile> [I<option>...]

=back

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<fb_lock_print> is a tool for displaying the information from the Firebird
lock system. These are useful when debugging lock
contention/conflict/performance problems.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item B<-d> I<database>

Print lock information about the specified database.

=item B<-f> I<lockfile>

Print lock information from the specified lock file. Firebird lock files live
in F</tmp/firebird>.

=item B<-o> | B<-p>

Print information about lock owner blocks. On by default.

=item B<-c>

Consistency mode. Blocks the lock manager so that no changes to the lock blocks
can be made while the information is gathered.

=item B<-l>

Print information about lock blocks.

=item B<-r>

Print information about lock request blocks.

=item B<-h>

Print information about lock history.

=item B<-a>

Print information about owner blocks, lock blocks, request blocks and history.
Same as C<-o -l -r -h>

=item B<-s> I<num>

Print information about lock series I<num>.

=item B<-i>[I<filter>] I<interval> I<count>

Enter interactive mode and continuously display lock counters per second.

Possible filters are:

=over

=item B<a>

lock acquires

=item B<o>

lock operations: enqueues, conversions, downgrades, dequeues, reads, writes and
queries

=item B<t>

lock operations by type.

=item B<w>

lock waits

=back

If no filter is given, all activity is shown.

I<interval> is the interval in seconds between displays. I<count> instructs
B<fb_lock_print> to exit after that many displays.

=item B<-w>

Print recursive list of locks each lock waits for.

=item B<-m>

HTML output.

=back

=head1 AUTHOR & COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) Damyan Ivanov, 2009.

This manpage was written by Damyan Ivanov for the Debian project but may be
used by others. Permission is granted to use this document, with or without
modifications, provided that this notice is retained. If we meet some day, and
you think this stuff is worth it, you can buy me a beer in return.
