=head1 NAME

fbtracemgr - Firebird operation traces

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<fbtracemgr> I<action> [I<parameter>...]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<fbtracemgr> gives access to the trace API of Firebird. It connects to a
Firebird server, starts a trace session and prints the audit trail to standard
output.

To cancel the trace session, press C<Ctrl+C>, send the C<TERM> signal or use
the stop command.

=head1 OPTIONS

=head2 Actions

=over

=item B<-sta>

=item B<-start>

Start a trace session

=item B<-sto>

=item B<-stop>

Stop a trace session

=item B<-su>

=item B<-suspend>

Suspend a trace session. No output is produced until the session is resumed.

=item B<-r>

=item B<-resume>

Resume a suspended trace session.

=item B<-l>

=item B<-list>

List existing trace sessions

=back

=head2 Action parameters

=over

=item B<-n> I<string>

=item B<-name> I<string>

Session name

=item B<-i> I<number>

=item B<-id> I<number>

Session ID

=item B<-c> I<path>

=item B<-config> I<path>

Path to the trace configuration file

=back

=head2 Connection parameters

=over

=item B<-se>

=item B<-service> I<string>

Service name in the form of C<service_mgr> (for local connection) or
I<host>:C<service_mgr> (for remote connection).

=item B<-u> I<user>

=item B<-user> I<user>

User name to connect as.

=item B<-p> I<password>

=item B<-password> I<password>

Connection password.

=item B<-fe> I<file>

=item B<-fetch> I<file>

Read password from file.

=item B<-t> I<string>

=item B<-trusted> I<string>

Force trusted authentication

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

  fbtracemgr -se remote_host:service_mgr -user sysdba -pass masterkey -list
  fbtracemgr -se service_mgr -start -name my_trace -config my_cfg.txt
  fbtracemgr -se service_mgr -suspend -id 2
  fbtracemgr -se service_mgr -resume -id 2
  fbtracemgr -se service_mgr -stop -id 4

=head1 AUTHOR & COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) Damyan Ivanov, 2009.

This manpage was written by Damyan Ivanov for the Debian project but may be
used by others. Permission is granted to use this document, with or without
modifications, provided that this notice is retained. If we meet some day, and
you think this stuff is worth it, you can buy me a beer in return.
